# Project: Data Warehouse

## Introduction
A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, you are tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights into what songs their users are listening to. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

## Project Description
In this project, you'll apply what you've learned on data warehouses and AWS to build an ETL pipeline for a database hosted on Redshift. To complete the project, you will need to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift and execute SQL statements that create the analytics tables from these staging tables.

## Objetives

* Access song play data and logs in S3 buckets;
* Create a Redshift cluster using Python SDK;
* Build a ETL pipeline;
* Create a star schema;

The fact and dimension tables are listed below:

### Fact Table

1. songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
2. songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

### Dimension Tables

1. **users:** users in the app
    * user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
2. **songs:** songs in music database
    * song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
3. **artists:** artists in music database
    * artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
4. **time:** timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
    * start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

## Prerequisites

* Jupyter Notebook
* Python 3
* pandas and psycopg2 libraries
* Place the following files in the same folder:  
    * dwh.cfg;
    * create_tables;
    * manage_cluster
    * elt.py;
    * README.md;
    * sql_queries;
    
## Files description

### 1. Song data:  s3://udacity-dend/song_data

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are file paths to two files in this dataset.

```
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json  
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

### 2. Log data:  s3://udacity-dend/log_data

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

```
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json  
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

### 3. manage_cluster.py
Create or deletes the cluster.
### 4. create_tables.py 
Drop and create the tables. Run this file to reset the tables before each time you run your ETL scripts.
### 5. etl.py
Read and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into the tables.
### 6. sql_queries.py 
Contain all sql queries, and is imported into the last three files above.
### 7. README.md 
Provide discussion of the project.
### 8. dwh.cfg
Configures the Redshift cluster and make a connection to the cluster;

## How to run the scripts
1. In the dwg.cfg type environment variables `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID` and `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY`.
2. Create Redshift cluster
    * run manage_cluster.py;
    * type 'c' to create the cluster;
3. After running manage_cluster.py:
    * copy DWH_ENDPOINT paste it at HOST in the dwg.cfg;
    * copy DWH_ROLE_ARN paste it at ARN;
4. Drop and create tables
    * run create_tables.py
5. Run ETL pipeline
    * run etl.py
6. Delete Cluster and IAM role
    * run manage_cluster.py
    * type 'd' to delete the cluster